Add procedure to use encrypted disks using PT (#2871)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/proc_associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption.adoc

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

{Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Clevis/Tang during host provisioning.

> You have to associate the partition table with your operating system entry and assign it to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry and assign it to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.
```

Reviewer 2: +1 to 'must'.

This sentence is quite long, which makes it harder to scan. 

You might want to break it into two sentences:

You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry. 
Then, you assign it to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Author: Applied both your suggestions.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.

> . On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.

Reviewer 2: Will the meaning of "associate... to your operating system entry" be clear to the user? I am having trouble visualizing it.

Author: I think so, yes. For every OS that you want to provision/manage, users have to associate various entities such as provisioning templates, architectures, installation media, etc.

I would also be OK to replace associate -> select; this IMHO we always use associate for this type of UI (random example from Foreman 3.10 RC):

![image](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/assets/12595287/63f7c158-9b9d-4f41-bec2-68e8521fb6b0)

Reviewer 2: Now I understand. Patternfly calls it a [dual list selector](https://www.patternfly.org/components/dual-list-selector). I will add a 'suggestion' just to show you how I would document this action. Feel free to ignore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. On the *Partition Table* tab, select `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` and then click the arrow to add it to your operating system entry.
```

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

> {Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Clevis/Tang during host provisioning.

Author: Applied.

> In addition, you can bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.

Reviewer 3: I think, we should 
- add one short sentence why clevis/tang is good to be used
- add these two links for more information on clevis/tang: 
  https://github.com/latchset/clevis
  https://github.com/latchset/tang

Then, you assign it to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].

.Next steps
* Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.
* Add host parameters to your host group to configure disk encryption:

> ** `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as value (default: `linux`)

Reviewer 4: "... and your cleartext passphrase for the LUKS container ... . If not specified, the passphrase is set to `linux`."

Author: Applied.

> * If you want to use LUKS to encrypt and decrypt the disks of your host, add the host parameter`disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If you want to use Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) to encrypt and decrypt the disks of your host, add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.
```

+

> If you set a Tang server, the value of `disk_enc_passphrase` is removed by {Project}.

Reviewer 4: "..., the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container by {Project}."

Reviewer 4: Please mention that one could use the disk encryption template standalone without Clevis/Tang, but if one would like to use Clevis/Tang, the disk encryption template must be used.

Reviewer 4: > "..., the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container by {Project}."

Just write:

"..., the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container."

Author: Applied.

> ** If you want to use Clevis/Tang to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time, add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If you want to use Clevis/Tang to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time, add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).
```

> You do not have to set `disk_enc_passphrase` because the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container after provisioning.

Reviewer 5: Is there a way to include this into the procedure itself, perhaps simply as steps 4+? Right now, this significantly diverges from [mod docs guide](https://redhat-documentation.github.io/modular-docs/#next-steps):

> Do not use Next steps to provide a second list of instructions.

Author: Thanks for the hint; I have applies your feedback. Is this what you had in mind?

> You do not have to set `disk_enc_passphrase` because the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container after provisioning.

Reviewer 6: Does that mean there is no passphrase left to unlock the LUKS-container after successful provisioning?
Would this not mean that before rebooting the machine, one has to set a new passphrase to the LUKS-container and configure it to allow the system to unlock it during boot (or at all)?

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

{Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) during host provisioning.
Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.
You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry.
Then, you assign the partition table to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].
. Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.
+

> * You either have to add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value, or, to use Clevis/Tang to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time, add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).

Reviewer 2: This sentence is very long and not easy to read. I strongly recommend breaking this into separate list items.

Author: Reworded. Please recheck @apinnick

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

> {Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using LUKS during host provisioning.

Reviewer 2: I feel like there is a mismatch between the sentence and the title. I would either change the title by using a verb other than "associating" or else mention "associating" in the intro. 

LUKS should be spelled out in full the first time.

Author: Spelled out LUKS. IMHO it comes clear with the third sentence; so I'd keep it as is.

> In addition, you can bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.
```
Suggesting this because it sounds like an option as well as an addition.

Author: Yes, applied.

You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry.

> Then, you assign it to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Reviewer 2: That's a lot of "it"s. :-) 

I recommend that you write the first "it" in full so that the user knows what you are referring to.

Author: Reworded.

> Using encrypted disks on hosts helps to proctect data at rest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.
```

Author: Applied.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].
. Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.
+

> * If you want to use Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) to encrypt and decrypt the disks of your host, add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To use Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) to encrypt and decrypt the disks of your host, add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.
```

Not mandatory but I think it's a little easier to read. Fewer words.

Author: Applied.

> * If you want to use Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) to encrypt and decrypt the disks of your host, add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.

Reviewer 2: Question just occurred to me. Is this step mandatory or optional? 

"If you want to use" sounds like this is an option. But the first sentence of this module sounds like LUKS encryption is always used. 

Please resolve the ambiguity.

Author: I have combined these two lines into one to clarify that a user has to select one option.

If a value for `disk_enc_passphrase` is not specified, the default value is `linux`.

> * If you want to use Clevis/Tang to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time, add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To use Clevis/Tang to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time, add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).
```

Author: Applied.

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

{Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) during host provisioning.
Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.
You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry.
Then, you assign the partition table to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].
. Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.
+

> There are two options to decrypt the disk of your hosts during boot time:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decrypt the disk of your host during boot time by using one of the following options:
```
For consistency. Otherwise it sounds like you're decrypting a single disk that belongs to multiple hosts.

Is this an optional or a mandatory step? If it is an option, I would add "Optional:" to the beginning of the sentence.

Author: Applied; it's not optional.

Reviewer 2: If this is not optional, then it should be a separate step.

+

> * You can add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* LUKS encryption: Add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.
```
I think the list items would be easier to scan if you add a summary at the beginning of each list item.

Author: Applied; see my last commit. I've also reworded the second option. Is this what you had in mind @apinnick ?

* You can add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`) to use Clevis/Tang.
+
If you set `disk_enc_tang_servers`, you do not have to set `disk_enc_passphrase` because the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container after provisioning.

.Additional resources

> * https://github.com/latchset/clevis

Reviewer 2: If this section is used by Satellite, I recommend that you comment them out. We are not supposed to link to GitHub repos without explicit permission because we cannot guarantee third party content.

Author: Hidden for satellite.

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

> {Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) during host provisioning.

Author: Applied.

Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.

> You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Associate the partition table with your operating system entry.
```

Author: Applied.

Then, you assign the partition table to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

> Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.

Reviewer 5: This sentence seems out of place here, isolated. I thought about a way to reorganize the introduction to move it to a place where it would have context. This is what I came up with:

> 
> {Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host by using Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) during host provisioning.
> Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.
> Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.
> 
> Associate the partition table with your operating system entry.
> Then, you assign the partition table to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Feel free to apply, adjust, or discard :)

Author: Excellent, applied!

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.

> . Select your {client-os} entry.

Reviewer 5: Is "select" the right word to choose here? I've seen "select" used with checkboxes on this project. In this case, wouldn't "click" be a better word?

Reviewer 2: @asteflova 
This is a dual list selector. See Max's [comment](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/pull/2871#discussion_r1533389323) with screenshot. 

Here is an example of usage: "From the **Available options** list, select the required options and then click the arrow to move the options to the **Chosen options** list." 

So "select" is the right verb because you select the option and then click the arrow to "associate" it with the OS. I'm not thrilled with the word "associate", but Max says it's understood in the context.

> . On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
```
or
```suggestion
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table to your operating system entry.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about "associate ... _to_ ...". AFAIK, the correct preposition is "with". Example: I associate holidays with over-eating. 

Not a blocker.

Author: Removed "the", replaced "to" with "with".

> For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this is the right place to link to creating partition tables. From what you're writing, users are selecting an existing partition table.

Author: Dropped.

. Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.
. Decrypt the disk of your host during boot time by using one of the following options:
+

> * LUKS encryption: Add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* LUKS encryption: Add the host `disk_enc_passphrase` parameter as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.
```
Right? Applicable also for the line below.

Reviewer 2: IMO, it's a lot of words for a user to scan. I think Max's original form, with added commas, would make it more readable:

"Add the host parameter, `disk_enc_passphrase`, as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as its value."

I think the commas make it easier to parse the meaning because the user sees that "host parameter" =  `disk_enc_passphrase`. Without the punctuation, it's not immediately apparent that 'host parameter' is a compound noun, with `disk_enc_passphrase` in apposition. 

Your suggestion, "host `disk_enc_passphrase` parameter", is grammatically correct. But I think that multiple adjectives  (host `disk_enc_passphrase`) modifying a single noun require more effort to understand. At least, my brain needs to work a little harder. :-)

> * LUKS encryption: Add the host parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` as type *string* and your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.

Reviewer 5: Or actually, how about:
```suggestion
+
For LUKS encryption:
+
** Add the host `disk_enc_passphrase` parameter as type *string*.
** Add your cleartext passphrase of the LUKS container as the value.
```
Or something along these lines. (Written on one line, the instructions feel like a bit too much.)

Reviewer 2: Also a good suggestion. I wonder whether we could simplify this further. I'm not sure we need to mention that it is a host parameter because of the context. I think the user can figure out that the examples are Tang server IP addresses. At least I assume these are IPs. If so, we can use more realistic examples like 192.0.2.0 to 192.0.2.255 (block used for d/s OpenShift docs).

* LUKS encryption: Add the parameter `disk_enc_passphrase` (type **string**): <LUKS-cleartext-passphrase>
* Tang server with Clevis: Add the parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` (type **array**): `["192.0.2.0"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "192.0.2.0"]`)

> * Clevis/Tang: Add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Clevis and Tang: Add the host parameter `disk_enc_tang_servers` as type *array* and your list of Tang servers (example: `["1.2.3.4"]` or `["{server-example-com}", "5.6.7.8"]`).
```
To avoid using slash instead of `and` or `or`.

Author: Applied.

+

> If you set `disk_enc_tang_servers`, you do not have to set `disk_enc_passphrase` because the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container after provisioning.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you set `disk_enc_tang_servers`, do not set `disk_enc_passphrase` because the passphrase slot is removed from the LUKS container after provisioning.
```

Author: Applied.

[id="associating-partition-tables-with-disk-encryption_{context}"]
= Associating partition tables with disk encryption

{Project} contains partition tables that encrypt the disk of your host using Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS) during host provisioning.
Optionally, you can also bind the disk to a Tang server through Clevis for decryption during boot.
You must associate the partition table with your operating system entry.
Then, you assign the partition table to your host group or select it manually during provisioning.

Encrypted disks on hosts protect data at rest.

.Procedure
. In the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *Provisioning Setup* > *Operating Systems*.
. Select your {client-os} entry.
. On the *Partition Table* tab, associate the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` to your operating system entry.
For more information, see xref:creating-partition-tables_{context}[].
. Create a host group that uses the `{client-provisioning-template-type} default encrypted` partition table.
For more information, see {ManagingHostsDocURL}Creating_a_Host_Group_managing-hosts[Creating a host group] in _{ManagingHostsDocTitle}_.

> +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Applied.

> Decrypt the disk of your host during boot time by using one of the following options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Decrypt the disk of your host during boot time by using one of the following options:
```

Author: Applied.
